RHIDP-2024: Configuring PostgreSQL databases in RHDH (#262)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/admin/proc-migrating-databases-to-an-external-server.adoc

====

. Reconfigure your `Backstage` custom resource (CR). For more information, see link:{LinkAdminGuide}#proc-configuring-postgresql-instance-using-operator_admin-rhdh[Configuring an external PostgreSQL instance using the Operator]. 
. Check that the following code is present at the end of your `Backstage` CR after reconfiguration:
+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  database:
    enableLocalDb: false 
  application:
  # ... 
    extraFiles:
      secrets:
        - name: <crt-secret> 
          key: postgres-crt.pem # key name as in <crt-secret> Secret
    extraEnvs:
      secrets:
        - name: <cred-secret> 
# ...        
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Reconfiguring the `Backstage` CR deletes the corresponding `StatefulSet` and `Pod` objects, but does not delete the `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object. Use the following command to delete the local `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object:

[source,terminal]
----
oc -n developer-hub delete pvc <local-psql-pvc-name>
----
where, the `<local-psql-pvc-name>` variable is in the `data-<psql-pod-name>` format.
====

. Apply the configuration changes.

.Verification

> . Verify that your {product-very-short} instance is running and contains the migrated data by running the following command:

Reviewer: These are supposed to be two parts of the verification:

1. verify your instance is running with all the migrated data
2. verify that your local database is disabled

```suggestion
. Verify that your {product-very-short} instance is running and contains the migrated data.

 .Verify that your {product-very-short} instance doesn't contain the local PostgreSQL by running the following command:
```

Author: fixed

[NOTE]
====
For quick migration, you can also use the link:https://github.com/janus-idp/operator/blob/main/hack/db_copy.sh[database copy script].
====

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[`pg_dump`] and link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html[`psql`] utilities on your local machine.
* For data export, you have the PGSQL user privileges to make a full dump of local databases.
* For data import, you have the PGSQL admin privileges to create an external database and populate it with database dumps.

.Procedure

. Configure port forwarding for the local PostgreSQL database pod by running the following command on a terminal: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc port-forward -n <your-namespace> <pgsql-pod-name> <forward-to-port>:<forward-from-port>
----
Where:

> * The `<pgsql-pod-name>` variable denotes the name of a PostgreSQL pod with the format `backstage-psql--<_index>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `<pgsql-pod-name>` variable denotes the name of a PostgreSQL pod with the format `backstage-psql-<deployment-name>-<_index>`.
```

* The `<forward-to-port>` variable denotes the port of your choice to forward PostgreSQL data to.
* The `<forward-from-port>` variable denotes the local PostgreSQL instance port, such as `5432`.
+
.Example: Configuring port forwarding
[source,terminal]
----

> oc port-forward -n backstage backstage-psql-backstage1-0 15432:5432

Reviewer: The example command for downstream will look more like this:
```suggestion
oc port-forward -n developer-hub backstage-psql-developer-hub-0 15432:5432
```

----

> . Make a copy of the `db_copy.sh` script and edit the following details based on your configuration:

Reviewer: This guide, as it is, relies on using the `db_copy.sh`. If we don't want to go general (and just say copy all the `allDB` databases at this point), we should make the `db_copy.sh` part of this guide (not just put it as a note). Also, we have to at least point to the right branch according to the version of RHDH (e.g. https://github.com/janus-idp/operator/blob/1.2.x/hack/db_copy.sh for 1.2). Or we can put this script into the documentation itself.

Author: added the script in the doc itself for better clarity.

====

. Reconfigure your `Backstage` custom resource (CR). For more information, see link:{LinkAdminGuide}#proc-configuring-postgresql-instance-using-operator_admin-rhdh[Configuring an external PostgreSQL instance using the Operator]. 
. Check that the following code is present at the end of your `Backstage` CR after reconfiguration:
+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  database:
    enableLocalDb: false 
  application:
  # ... 
    extraFiles:
      secrets:
        - name: <crt-secret> 
          key: postgres-crt.pem # key name as in <crt-secret> Secret
    extraEnvs:
      secrets:
        - name: <cred-secret> 
# ...        
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Reconfiguring the `Backstage` CR deletes the corresponding `StatefulSet` and `Pod` objects, but does not delete the `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object. Use the following command to delete the local `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object:

[source,terminal]
----

> oc -n backstage delete pvc <local-psql-pvc-name>

Reviewer: Better to use the downstream name for the namespace
```suggestion
oc -n developer-hub delete pvc <local-psql-pvc-name>
```

----

> ====

Reviewer: Better to add the note "Where `<local-psql-pvc-name>` has format `data-<psql-pod-name>` (see above)"

[id="proc-migrating-databases-to-an-external-server_{context}"]
= Migrating local databases to an external database server

> By default, {product} hosts the data for each plugin in a PostgreSQL database. When you fetch the list of databases, you might see multiple databases based on the number of plugins configured. You can migrate the data from an {product-very-short} instance hosted on a local PostgreSQL server to an external PostgreSQL service, such as AWS RDS, Azure database, or Crunchy database. To migrate the data from each {product-very-short} instance one by one, you can use PostgreSQL utilities, such as link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[pg_dump] with link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html[psql] or link:https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, {product} hosts the data for each plugin in a PostgreSQL database. When you fetch the list of databases, you might see multiple databases based on the number of plugins configured in {product-short). You can migrate the data from an {product-very-short} instance hosted on a local PostgreSQL server to an external PostgreSQL service, such as AWS RDS, Azure database, or Crunchy database. To migrate the data from each {product-very-short} instance, you can use PostgreSQL utilities, such as link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[`pg_dump`] with link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html[psql] or link:https://www.pgadmin.org/[`pgAdmin`]. 
```

[NOTE]
====

> For quick migration, you can also use this link:https://github.com/janus-idp/operator/blob/main/hack/db_copy.sh[database copy script].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For quick migration, you can also use the link:https://github.com/janus-idp/operator/blob/main/hack/db_copy.sh[database copy script].
```

====

.Prerequisites

> * You have installed the link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[pg_dump] and link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html[psql] utilities on your local machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You have installed the link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[`pg_dump`] and link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html[`psql`] utilities on your local machine.
```

> * For data export, you have the PGSQL user sufficient privileges to make a full dump of local databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For data export, you have the PGSQL user privileges to make a full dump of local databases.
```

> * For data import, you have the PGSQL user sufficient admin privileges to create an external database and populate it with database dumps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For data import, you have the PGSQL admin privileges to create an external database and populate it with database dumps.
```

.Procedure

> . Configure port forwarding for the local PostgreSQL database pod by running the following command on a dedicated terminal: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure port forwarding for the local PostgreSQL database pod by running the following command on a terminal: 
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
oc port-forward -n <your-namespace> <pgsql-pod-name> <forward-to-port>:<forward-from-port>
----
Where:
* The `<pgsql-pod-name>` variable denotes the name of a PostgreSQL pod with the format `backstage-psql--<_index>`.
* The `<forward-to-port>` variable denotes the port of your choice to forward PostgreSQL data to.
* The `<forward-from-port>` variable denotes the local PostgreSQL instance port, usually `5432`.
+
.Example: Configuring port forwarding
[source,terminal]
----
oc port-forward -n backstage backstage-psql-backstage1-0 15432:5432
----

. Make a copy of the `db_copy.sh` script and edit the following details based on your configuration:

* `to_host`: The destination host name, for example, `<db-instance-name>.rds.amazonaws.com`

> * `to_port`: The destination port that is usually `5432`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `to_port`: The destination port, such as `5432`
```

* `to_user`: The destination server username, for example, `postgres`

> * `from_host`: The source host name that is usually `127.0.0.1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `from_host`: The source host name, such as `127.0.0.1`
```

> * `from_port`: The source port number, that is, the `<forward-to-port>` variable 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `from_port`: The source port number, such as `<forward-to-port>` variable 
```

* `from_user`: The source server username, for example, `postgres`
* `allDB`: The name of databases to import in double quotes separated by spaces, for example, `("backstage_plugin_app" "backstage_plugin_auth" "backstage_plugin_catalog" "backstage_plugin_permission" "backstage_plugin_scaffolder" "backstage_plugin_search")`

. Create a destination database for copying the data:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> /bin/bash TO_PSW=<destination-db-password> /path/to/db_copy.sh

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/bin/bash TO_PSW=<destination-db-password> /path/to/db_copy.sh <1>
```

----

> Where,

Reviewer 2: I'd eliminate the fluff
```suggestion

```

> * The `<destination-db-password>` variable denotes the password to connect to the destination database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> The `<destination-db-password>` variable denotes the password to connect to the destination database.
```

+
[NOTE]
====

> You can stop port forwarding when copying of the data is complete. Also, if you are dealing with large databases, go to the link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/backup-dump.html#BACKUP-DUMP-LARGE[site] and see the details to use the compression tools. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can stop port forwarding when the copying of the data is complete. For more information about handling large databases and details about using the compression tools, see link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/backup-dump.html#BACKUP-DUMP-LARGE[Handling Large Databases] section on the PostgreSQL website.
```

====

> . Reconfigure your `Backstage` custom resource (CR). For more information, see link:{LinkAdminGuide}#proc-configuring-postgresql-instance-using-operator_admin-rhdh[Configuring an external PostgreSQL instance using the Operator]. 

Reviewer 2: This should be Developer Hub CR, we also have procedure describing how to configure RHDH CR: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.1/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#proc-config-rhdh-custom-resource_admin-rhdh

Author: I think we should use the exact CR name. the link mentioned here also point to the `Backstage` CR, not the `Developer Hub` CR. throughout the doc, we have use the name `Backstage` CR, not `Developer Hub` CR.

. Check that the following code is present at the end of your `Backstage` CR after reconfiguration:
+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
 database:

>    enableLocalDb: false 

Reviewer: Fix YAML indentation by increments of 2 spaces (`  `).

  application:
  # ... 
    extraFiles:
      secrets:
        - name: <crt-secret> 
          key: postgres-crt.pem # key name as in <crt-secret> Secret
    extraEnvs:
      secrets:
        - name: <cred-secret> 
# ...        
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Reconfiguring the `Backstage` CR deletes the corresponding `StatefulSet` and `Pod` objects, but does not delete the `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object. Use the following command to delete the local `PersistenceVolumeClaim` object:

[source,terminal]
----
oc -n backstage delete pvc <local-psql-pvc-name>
----
====

. Apply the configuration changes.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add the verification step as well?

Author: @zdrapela, Do we have any verification step that we can add for user's reference?

Reviewer: User can verify that his RHDH instance is running and contains the data that was migrated, and that `oc get pods -n <your-namespace>` returns only the `backstage-developer-hub-...` pod and doesn't contain the `backstage-psql-developer-hub-0` pod, for example. The same can be done in the OCP Console - Developer view - Topolgy.

* For data export, you have the PGSQL user sufficient privileges to make a full dump of local databases.
* For data import, you have the PGSQL user sufficient admin privileges to create an external database and populate it with database dumps.

.Procedure

. Configure port forwarding for the local PostgreSQL database pod by running the following command on a dedicated terminal: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
kubectl port-forward -n <your-namespace> <pgsql-pod-name> <forward-to-port>:<forward-from-port>
----
Where:
* The `<pgsql-pod-name>` variable denotes the name of a PostgreSQL pod with the format `backstage-psql--<_index>`.
* The `<forward-to-port>` variable denotes the port of your choice to forward PostgreSQL data to.
* The `<forward-from-port>` variable denotes the local PostgreSQL instance port, usually `5432`.
+
.Example: Configuring port forwarding
[source,terminal]
----
kubectl port-forward -n backstage backstage-psql-backstage1-0 15432:5432
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:15432 -> 5432
Forwarding from [::1]:15432 -> 5432

> ----

Author: Can we use `oc` cmd instead of `kubectl` for this procedure? we should not document things for generic k8s, instead we need to make it specific for OCP.
